Fix and update theming (#4409)
owncloud/docs: modules/developer_manual/pages/core/theming.adoc

NOTE: Before ownCloud 10, theming was done via the `config.php` entry `'theme' => ''`.  This is deprecated in ownCloud 10. Users who have this entry in their `config.php` should remove it and use a theme app to customize their ownCloud instance instead.

== Quick Start

For the impatient, who want to play with themes right away, the following commands get a theme installed quickly. Adjust the names and paths according to your setup. For docker installations use the directory `/var/www/owncloud/custom`.

. Install unzip if not available
+
[source,console]
----
sudo apt install unzip
----

. If it exists, go into your `apps-external` folder, else use `apps`
+
[source,console]
----
cd /var/www/owncloud/apps-external
----

. Download the theme

+
[source,console]
----
wget https://github.com/owncloud/theme-example/archive/master.zip
----

. Extract the theme
+
[source,console]
----
unzip master.zip
----

. Remove the zip file
+
[source,console]
----
rm master.zip
----

. Rename the theme
+
[source,console]
----
mv theme-example-master mynewtheme
----

> . Change the app id in info.xml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Change the app ID in info.xml
```

> Now in more detail for those who want to understand the procedures presented above and work on their new theme. To create a theme requires two basic steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now in more detail for those who want to understand the procedures presented above and work on their new theme. Creating a theme requires two basic steps:
```

> 1.  Copy and extend https://github.com/owncloud/theme-example[ownCloud's example theme], or create one from scratch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Copy and extend https://github.com/owncloud/theme-example[ownCloud's example theme] or create one from scratch.
```

2.  Enable the theme which can be found in menu:Settings[Admin > Apps > Show disabled Apps]

> All themes, whether copied or new, must meet two key criteria, these are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All themes, whether copied or new, must meet two key criteria:
```

> 1.  They must be stored in an app directory of your ownCloud installation, preferred in `apps-external` or a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  They must be stored in an app directory of your ownCloud installation, preferrably in `apps-external` or a
```

</info>
----

The value of the `id` element needs to be the name of your theme’s folder. We recommend that it always be prefixed with `theme-`. The main reason for doing so, is that it is alphabetically sorted in a terminal
when handling app folders.

The `type` element needs to be the same as is listed above, so that ownCloud knows to handle the app as a theme. The dependencies element needs to be present to set the minimum and maximum versions of ownCloud which are supported. If it’s not present, a warning will be displayed in ownCloud 10 and an error will be thrown in the upcoming ownCloud 11.

> While the remaining elements are optional, they help when working with the theme in the ownCloud Admin dashboard. Please consider filling out as many as possible, as completely as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the remaining elements are optional, they help when working with the theme in the ownCloud Admin dashboard. Consider filling out as many as possible, as completely as possible.
```

=== Theme Signing

If you are going to publish the theme as an app in the {oc-marketplace-url}[marketplace], you need to sign it. However, if you are only creating a private theme for your own ownCloud installation, then you do not need to.

> That said, to avoid a signature warning in the ownCloud UI, you need to add it to the `integrity.ignore.missing.app.signature` list in `config/config.php`. The following example allows the app whose application id is `app-id` to have no signature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That said, to avoid a signature warning in the ownCloud UI, you need to add it to the `integrity.ignore.missing.app.signature` list in `config/config.php`. The following example allows the app whose application ID is `app-id` to have no signature.
```

== How to Override Images

> Any image, such as the default logo, can be overridden by including one with the same path structure in your theme. For example, let’s say that you want to replace the logo on the login-page above the credentials-box which, by default has the path: `owncloud/core/img/logo-icon.svg`. To override it, assuming that your custom theme was called `theme-example` (_which will be assumed for the remainder of the theming documentation_), add a new file with the following path: `owncloud/apps/theme-example/core/img/logo-icon.svg`. After the theme is activated, this image will override the default one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any image, such as the default logo, can be overridden by including one with the same path structure in your theme. For example, let’s say that you want to replace the logo on the login page above the credentials box which, by default, has the path: `owncloud/core/img/logo-icon.svg`. To override it, assuming that your custom theme was called `theme-example` (_which will be assumed for the remainder of the theming documentation_), add a new file with the following path: `owncloud/apps/theme-example/core/img/logo-icon.svg`. After the theme is activated, this image will override the default one.
```

=== Default Image Paths

> To make building a new theme that much easier, below is a list of a range of the image paths used in the default theme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make building a new theme easier, find below a list of a range of the image paths used in the default theme.
```

[cols="50%,20%,70%",options="header",]
|===
| Description            | Section | Location

> | The logo at the login-page above the credentials-box | General | `owncloud/core/img/logo-icon.svg`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| The logo at the login page above the credentials box | General | `owncloud/core/img/logo-icon.svg`
```

| Trash can image        | | `owncloud/core/img/actions/delete.svg`
|===

> NOTE: When overriding the favicon, make sure your custom theme includes and override for both `owncloud/apps/core/img/favicon.svg` and `owncloud/apps/core/img/favicon.png`, to cover any future updates to favicon handling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: When overriding the favicon, make sure your custom theme includes an override for both `owncloud/apps/core/img/favicon.svg` and `owncloud/apps/core/img/favicon.png`, to cover any future updates to favicon handling.
```

> NOTE: When using custom filetype icons in a custom theme, it is necessary to run `occ maintenance:mimetype:update-js` to activate them.  For more information please refer to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: When using custom filetype icons in a custom theme, it is necessary to run `occ maintenance:mimetype:update-js` to activate them.  For more information, refer to 
```

In `core/css/styles.css`, search for the following CSS code:

[source,css]
----
#body-login {
    background: #745bca; /* Old browsers */
    background: -moz-linear-gradient(top, #947bea 0%, #745bca 100%);
}
----

> Then, replace it with the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace it with the following:
```

[source,css]
----
#body-login {
    background: rgb(31,9,121);
    background: linear-gradient(90deg, rgba(31,9,121,1) 38%, rgba(2,0,36,1) 58%);
}
----

If you only want one color, replace the existing CSS code with this:

[source,css]
----
#body-login {
    background: rgb(31,9,121);
}
----

TIP: If you are not sure what color to pick, {css-gradient-url}[CSS Gradient] may be able to help.

To change the icon, replace the files in `core/img` (`logo.png`, and `logo.svg`) with your icons. The reason for the PNG files is to have a fallback option for older browsers.

> If you keep the names - you don't need to change the path in `core/css/styles.css`. If you change the names, adjust `styles.css` file accordingly, as in the following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you keep the names, you don't need to change the path in `core/css/styles.css`. If you change the names, adjust the `styles.css` file accordingly like in the following example:
```

Search for `#body-public #header` in `core/css/styles.css`.

[source,css]
----
#body-public #header {
    background-color: #745bca;
}
----

> You can also write your own, like the one from the login page, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also write your own, like the one from the login page for example:
```

[source,css]
----
#body-public #header {
    background: rgb(31,9,121);
    background: linear-gradient(90deg, rgba(31,9,121,1) 38%, rgba(2,0,36,1) 58%);
}
----

> Change the logo by replacing `logo-icon.png` and `logo-icon.svg` with your logos, in `core/img`. If you change the names of the logos, adjust the path accordingly in `core/css/styles.css`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Change the logo by replacing `logo-icon.png` and `logo-icon.svg` with your logo, in `core/img`. If you change the names of the logos, adjust the path accordingly in `core/css/styles.css`.
```

[source,css]
----
#header .logo-icon {
    background-image: url('../img/logo-icon.svg');
    height: 34px;
}
----

=== How to Override Settings Page Icons

ownCloud provides the ability to override Personal and Admin settings page icons. To do so requires two things:

. A custom (SVG) icon; and
. Refactoring `SettingsManager.php`

> For example, say that you wanted to override the Admin Encryption settings icon. To do that, first add a custom icon to an app's `img` directory (ideally one that makes sense) e.g., `</path/to/owncloud>/apps/encryption/img/gnu.svg`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you want to override the Admin Encryption settings icon, first add a custom icon to an app's `img` directory, e.g. `</path/to/owncloud>/apps/encryption/img/gnu.svg`.
```

> Then, update the `getBuiltInSections` function of `lib/private/Settings/SettingsManager.php`. There, you need to change the final argument to the relevant call to `new Section`, for the settings section that you want to change, as in the example below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, update the `getBuiltInSections` function of `lib/private/Settings/SettingsManager.php`. You need to change the final argument of the relevant call to `new Section` for the settings section that you want to change, like in the example below.
```

In the example above, I've changed the encryption section's icon, by changing the final argument to be the custom icon's name — _minus the file extension_.

TIP: Icons *must* be in SVG format. No other file formats are supported.

== How to Override the Default Colors

> To override the default style sheet, create a new CSS style sheet in your theme, in the theme’s `css` directory, called `styles.css`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To override the default style sheet, create a new CSS style sheet called `styles.css` in the theme’s `css` directory.
```

> 1.  Create the `l10n` folder inside your theme, for the app that you want to override.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Create the `l10n` folder inside your theme for the app that you want to override.
```

2.  In the `l10n` folder, create the translation file for the language that you want to customize.

> For example, if you want to overwrite the German translation of _`Download`_ in the files app, you would create the file `owncloud/apps/theme-example/apps/files/l10n/de_DE.js`. Note that the structure is the same as for images. You just mimic the original file location inside your theme. You would then put the following code in the file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you want to overwrite the German translation of _`Download`_ in the files app, create the file `owncloud/apps/theme-example/apps/files/l10n/de_DE.js`. Note that the structure is the same as for images. You just mimic the original file location inside your theme. Put the following code in the file:
```

);
----

> You then need to create a second translation file, `owncloud/apps/theme-example/apps/files/l10n/de_DE.json`, which looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, create a second translation file, `owncloud/apps/theme-example/apps/files/l10n/de_DE.json`, which looks like this:
```

}
----

Both files (`.js` and `.json`) are needed. The first is needed to enable translations in the JavaScript code and the second one is read by the PHP code and provides the data for translated terms.

== How to Override Names, Slogans, and URLs

> In addition to translations, the ownCloud theme allows a lot of the names that are shown on the web interface to be changed. This is done in `defaults.php`, which needs to be located within the theme’s root folder. You can find a sample version in `owncloud/app/theme-example/defaults.php`. In there, you need to define a class named `OC_Theme` and implement the methods that you want to overwrite.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to translations, the ownCloud theme allows you to change a lot of the names shown on the web interface. This is done in `defaults.php`, which needs to be located within the theme’s root folder. You can find a sample version in `owncloud/app/theme-example/defaults.php`. In the file, you need to define a class named `OC_Theme` and implement the methods that you want to overwrite.
```

| `getSlogan`        | Returns the slogan.
|===

Only these methods are available in the templates, because we internally wrap around hardcoded method names.

> One exception is the method `buildDocLinkToKey` which gets passed in a key as its first parameter. For core we do something like this to build the documentation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One exception is the method `buildDocLinkToKey` which gets passed in a key as its first parameter. For core, we do something similar to build the documentation
```

There are different options for testing themes:

> * If you’re using a tool like the Inspector tools inside Mozilla you can test out the CSS-Styles immediately inside the css-attributes, while you’re looking at the page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you’re using a tool like the Inspector tools of Mozilla, you can test the CSS styles immediately inside the css-attributes, while you’re looking at the page.
```

* If you have a development server, you can test out the effects in a live environment.

== Settings Page Registration

=== How Can an App Register a Section in the Admin or Personal Section?

> As of ownCloud 10.0, apps must register admin and personal section settings in `info.xml`. As a result, all calls to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of ownCloud 10.0, apps must register Admin and Personal section settings in `info.xml`. As a result, all calls to
```

==== Updating info.xml

> First, an entry must be added into the `<settings>` element in `info.xml`, specifying the class name responsible for rendering the panel. These will be loaded automatically when an app is enabled. For example, to register an admin and a personal section would require the following configuration..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, an entry must be added into the `<settings>` element in `info.xml`, specifying the class name responsible for rendering the panel. These will be loaded automatically when an app is enabled. For example, to register an Admin and a Personal section requires the following configuration:
```

=== Create Custom Sections

> At the moment, there is no provision for apps creating their own settings sections. This is to encourage sensible and intelligent grouping of the settings panels which in turn should improve the overall user experience. If you think a new section should be added to core however, please create a PR with the appropriate changes to `OC\Settings\SettingsManager`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the moment, there is no provision for apps creating their own settings sections. This is to encourage sensible grouping of the settings panels which in turn should improve the overall user experience. However, if you think a new section should be added to core, please create a PR with the appropriate changes to `OC\Settings\SettingsManager`.
```
